[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard
and this is Mystery Teachings.
Do you remember your dreams?
Have you ever
experienced a dream that
felt like it really happened?
Or have you ever become
lucid during a dream,
aware of the fact that
you were dreaming?
We spend nearly one third
of our life sleeping.
What's happening
during this time?
Of course, our body is resting.
But what's happening with our
spirits, our consciousness,
and mind?
Could it be that dreams are
another version of reality.
Ever since I was really young,
I've had super vivid dreams.
Being aware of my
dreams and sharing them
with my parents and friends has
always been a part of my life.
Because of this, my dream time
has been a very enriching part
of my life.
Both my parents
were active students
of the Edgar Cayce readings.
And in addition, my dad studied
parapsychology and the work
of Carl Jung while in college.
And my mom's a college professor
of inter and intrapersonal
communications.
Plus, she was really involved
with the Monroe Institute
that explores consciousness
and journeys out of body.
So we developed a
family tradition
of sharing dreams and
interpreting them, especially
when they felt significant.
In this episode, I'd
like to share with you
some of what I've learned about
our life in the dream time.
Dreams can be such a
useful guide in our life.
They can help us solve problems,
receive insights, and higher
teachings from higher planes.
Learn about ourselves
and so much more.
So I'd like to share some
useful methods with you
for becoming more in tune
with your dream time.
When we talk about
dreams, the first question
that often comes up is,
does everybody dream?
Some people swear
that they don't dream.
But science shows dreaming
is a part of our sleep cycle.
Even if we aren't aware of
it or remember our dreams
when we wake up, we all dream.
Everyone goes through
a couple of REM cycles
at night, which is marked
by rapid eye movement
during our sleep.
And during this
time, the brain is
firing off with similar
patterns to when we're conscious
and awake.
Only in this case,
we're dreaming.
But for the most
part, our brain can't
tell the difference between
dreaming and wakefulness.
So everybody dreams.
Whether we remember it or not
is another matter altogether.
So what's happening
when we dream?
Are dreams meaningless
or meaningful?
And how can we
engage our dream time
to support our
overall progression?
There are many types of dreams.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I have learned to group
them into four categories.
The first is what we can
call subconscious dreams.
These are the dreams
that we're not aware of
and the dreams that
are happening based
on our subconscious processing.
But as we start to
become aware and we
engage more
consciously with trying
to understand what our
subconscious is telling us,
we start entering the early
stages of conscious dreaming.
There are several
levels of conscious
dreaming that we'll explore.
Then there's also
lucid dreaming,
which is when we learn
to control our dreams.
And the fourth category is what
I call astral dreaming, where
we are literally doing
work on the astral planes
during our dream time.
And then we have some
recall of that work.
Let's first talk about dreams
that are purely subconscious.
A good majority
of our dreams tend
to be like this, at least
until we start to engage
with them more consciously.
These are when the
deeper parts of our brain
are trying to process
events from our day.
Maybe they were
influenced by what we ate,
or something we saw on
TV, or some other stimuli
that we were exposed
to during our day.
Such dreams can
often seem random
and it's hard to
follow their sequence.
Or perhaps, there
are things that
have been suppressed in the
subconscious such as fears,
emotions, or unacknowledged
parts of ourselves.
These are trying to make
their way to the surface
of our awareness.
Or maybe something's been
bothering us in the background.
We haven't given it
our conscious attention
or we might even
be pushing it away.
For example, have you ever had
a dream where you did something
that was so embarrassing and
when you woke up from it,
you were feeling
a little anxious?
When I was in my
teens and early 20s,
this was a recurring
theme for me.
I'd have dreams where
I'd go out in public,
but maybe I'd forgotten
to put on makeup
or perhaps, I'd be only half
dressed or something like that.
And the perfectionist in
me would be so embarrassed
and stressed about
it the whole dream,
until I woke up with
a sigh of relief
that it was only a dream.
What these were revealing
to me where some of my
fears and insecurities.
So by my mid-20s, I really
started to pay attention
to this recurring message.
And I decided to work on myself.
As I overcame these
fears in my life
and stripped away much of
my vanity and perfectionism
that was based on
insecurity, the dreams
transformed until
they were no longer
embarrassing or stressful.
When we start to more actively
engage and pay attention
to our dreams,
they will progress
from being mostly subconscious
to becoming an amazing tool
for growth and transformation.
This is when we start
to enter the realm
of conscious dreaming.
What is conscious dreaming?
There are many levels
of conscious dreaming,
but it begins when our
conscious mind starts
to observe and become aware
of what our dreams are
communicating to us.
At first, that awareness comes
as we wake up from a dream,
remember it, and
contemplate its meaning.
For the most part, our
dreams speak in symbols.
And they're usually not
to be taken literally.
Understanding their
messages involves
getting to know
the various symbols
and archetypal
characters of our dreams.
For example, when people we
know show up in our dream,
it's usually not
about that person,
but it's about what
they represent to us.
Every character in
our dreams typically
symbolizes some aspect
of us, even if it's
someone we know in real life.
So if a family member or guide
appears in one of your dreams,
first ask yourself,
what qualities
do you tend to think or
feel most about that person?
Who are they to you?
What role do they
play in your life?
What is their main
characteristic?
Or how would you describe them?
At a symbolic dream
level, it's likely
that this person represents
that aspect of you.
As an example, if I think of
my father as more intellectual
and my mother is more
intuitive, them in my dreams,
they typically represent my
intellectual or intuitive
sides.
Then I want to pay attention
to what they're doing
and how they're
behaving in the dream.
It's important to identify
these symbols for ourselves.
A dream dictionary
isn't going to tell you
this because they're
personal symbols.
There are, however,
certain symbols
that have universal meaning.
For example, animals often
have shamanic symbolism.
And the go-to references
that I like best
when it comes to interpreting
animal symbols in my dreams
are the "Medicine Cards" by
Jamie Sams and David Carson,
as well as "Animals
Speak" by Ted Andrews.
Sometimes we might also
have alchemical symbols
appear in our dream.
These tend to be
more archetypal.
Meaning they're part of a
universal language of symbols.
Understanding the archetypes and
how they show up in our dreams
is really helpful.
The works of Carl Jung, Joseph
Campbell, and reference guide
to our chemical symbols can
help us to better understand
these archetypal symbols.
In essence, our
conscious mind needs
to learn the language
of our dreams.
As we learn this
symbolic language,
we can later use
it in a reverse way
to communicate to our
subconscious mind.
For example, we might engage
our active imagination
by working with these
characters and symbols
through our visualization
at a conscious level.
We can use such methods to
consciously set intentions
for our dreams to give
us answers to questions
or to get the deeper parts
of ourselves working together
better.
One way to do that would be
to identify our intention.
And then to create a symbol
that represents that intention.
Meditate upon that symbol
and intention for a while
before going to bed.
And then carry the symbol
into the dream time with you.
The bottom line
with all of this is
that we want to become more
aware so that we can harness
our dreams in such
a way that really
aids our progression in life.
The next step is to
remember our dreams.
Are there any tricks we
can use to get better
at remembering our dreams?
Remembering our dreams usually
comes down to two things.
The first is our
lifestyle practices
and the second, our intentions.
By lifestyle practices,
we're talking
about everything from our
stress levels to what we eat
and how late.
As well as whether we
consume any substances
that might interfere.
For example, alcohol,
marijuana, sleeping pills,
and many pharmaceutical
drugs are
things that numb or
interfere with the bridge
between our conscious
mind and our sleep state.
Watching TV late
at night can also
interfere with this process.
When we watch TV,
our mind is flooded
with images and drama, which
then has to be worked through
during our dream time.
Clearing the mind with things
like meditation or a ritual
practice can help us to
prepare ourselves to go
to sleep in a more clear state.
What else can we do to have
a more productive dream time?
Well, meditation is a great
tool to also help bridge
from our conscious
mind into our dreams.
Having a meditation
practice in general
is a great place to start.
Building this muscle helps us
to maintain conscious awareness
as we transition into a deeper
brainwave states of alpha,
theta, and even delta as
we move towards sleep.
Meditating for 20
minutes right before bed
gives us an opportunity
to quiet our mind
and set our intentions
for the dream time.
This brings us to a
second important key
for conscious dreaming,
which is our intention.
This comes down to
making an effort
to actively engage
and create a bridge
between our conscious
awareness and the dream time.
The more we pay
attention to our dreams
and consciously work with
them, the more will remember
and the more they'll
reveal to us.
Our first intention
is to actually
remember our dreams
in the morning
and then to write them down.
The second intention
is what we specifically
want to dream about or receive
guidance on from our dreams.
Keeping a dream journal is
really helpful for remembering
and connecting to our dreams.
Before going to bed,
write down your intention
for your dream time.
Then whenever you
wake up, whether it's
in the middle of the
night or in the morning,
write down anything that you
can remember from the dreams.
Even if you don't
remember anything,
just write down how you feel.
This practice will
help you continue
building the bridge between your
conscious mind and the dream
time.
I've had some amazing
archetypal dreams in my life.
One of the most impactful
dreams came to me
when I was working on
a program for women.
I was co-creating
this with a colleague
and we came to a place
where we felt kind of stuck.
We were asking, what
are we missing here?
We knew something was missing
that's really important for us,
as women, to understand.
And we decided to
meditate on this question
and see what comes through.
I spent a good week
contemplating and meditating
on it every day.
And still nothing
was really coming
through that was clear
enough where I felt
like my ego wasn't involved.
So one night I decided to
work with it in my dreams.
I asked my guides to
bring it to me in a dream
so that I could get my ego
filters out of the way.
That night I had the most epic
archetypal dream of my life.
I could totally make it
into a movie script one day.
I woke up the next
morning knowing
I had been on an epic journey.
And it was so
archetypal and I knew
this dream held the
answers to our question.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I wrote down the details
as soon as I could.
But there were things I didn't
quite understand right away.
But they were clues
and it was all perfect.
It was exactly what I needed
to unravel the mystery
and come to understand.
I started by doing
a Google search
on a unique name that was
given in the dream that
had me somewhat mystified.
And then that led me
to finding an article,
analyzing the meaning
of a character in one
of Shakespeare's plays
by the same name.
This then led to more
clues and insights.
The dream was so
layered that I then
decided I'm going to share
it with some friends who
are familiar with this
issue and the symbolism.
And through that
dialogue, we were
able to discover the
meaning of the dream.
And it was really profound.
Now to me, this is one of
the best uses of dreams.
To help us gain insight into
the bigger things, the deeper
questions.
The things that we need
to understand and shift
within ourselves individually
and collectively.
Now as we get good at
conscious dreaming,
a more advanced goal would
be to become conscious
within our dream.
And be able to observe and
engage with it in real time.
Is this more advanced
form of conscious
dreaming the same
as lucid dreaming?
Not quite.
Let's explore the difference.
What is lucid dreaming?
How's it different from
conscious dreaming?
Well, have you ever been
in the middle of a dream
when you suddenly
realized you're dreaming?
And then from there, you
were able to shape or change
the dream?
This is lucid dreaming.
I've had lucid
dreams, for example,
where I was having a bad
dream of something chasing
or trying to attack me.
And at some point, I
realized this isn't real.
This is a dream.
And it's like waking
up within the dream.
And at that point,
I thought, well,
I'm just going to
fly out of here.
So I'd take flight and the
whole dream would change.
When we become lucid and
aware within the dream,
and consciously choose to
manipulate it and change it,
we can go and have
a fantastic journey.
But it's something we
have to learn how to do.
Now one way we can
start to lucid dream
is to program ourselves to
check-in on whether we're
dreaming or awake.
This starts we're doing
it throughout our day when
we're awake.
We could start a habit
of looking at our hands
and asking, am I
dreaming or am I awake?
If our hands stay
normal, then we're awake.
But in a dream, things
don't usually stay normal.
They may start to do something
funny or not quite look right.
Or we may even do
impossible things.
These can be triggers to
becoming lucid during a dream.
But we have to do this
throughout the day
to program ourselves
to check-in.
Then when we're asleep, we have
that subconscious programming
to trigger us to check and
wake up within the dream.
In a lucid dream,
we're becoming more
conscious of what was previously
a subconscious type of dream.
And if we choose to
change the dream,
well, now we're
applying our will.
But it's, kind
of, still our egos
will that gets in
when we become lucid.
We tend to control the
dream from our personality
level of things.
Sometimes the higher self will
come in and guide our dream.
And here comes the
main difference
between lucid dreaming
and conscious dreaming.
In more advanced forms
of conscious dreaming,
we become aware
that we're dreaming.
But rather than trying
to manipulate it
with our personal
will, we ask, what
is it that I'm supposed
to be learning here?
We call in our higher
self and our guides
to teach us and help us
understand and learn.
We take a more
receptive role, yet it's
still proactive and
conscious within the dream.
As we do this, dreams begin
to unfold in a higher form.
We begin to consciously
engage with the archetypes.
Our higher selves and our
guides communicate with us
through our dreams when
we're paying attention.
The more we consciously
engage with our dreams,
the more we open ourselves
to this communication.
We're participating
in this conversation.
So in conscious
dreaming, we're not
trying to manipulate our dream
like we might in lucid dreams.
Instead, we're asking questions
and receiving guidance
to help us with our life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And the cool thing
about conscious dreaming
is that we can really start to
use our dream time to support
our progression.
Lucid dreaming can be
fun, but it's not usually
supporting our progression
in any big way.
It's kind of similar
to astral travel
for tourist-type purposes.
It's a phenomenon.
It can have a lot of glamor,
and allure, and it can be fun,
but it's not always
productive, necessarily.
When we want to make
it more purposeful,
we can shift into
conscious dreaming
and use our dreams
as opportunities
to learn and grow.
This helps us
access deeper wisdom
to support us in our life.
Now the fourth category
of dreams that I mentioned
is what is known
as astral dreaming.
How is astral
dreaming different?
What does this term mean?
And how does it relate
to astral travel?
With astral dreams,
we're actually
engaging with the astral planes.
It's not just symbolic
or archetypal.
And we all astral
travel while sleeping,
but it's usually during the
deepest part of our sleep
cycle.
It might only be 15 to 30-minute
period during the night
when we are astral traveling.
And we're usually
not aware of it.
But if we do become aware
within an astral dream,
the experience is very, real.
Like it really happened.
And it can sometimes
be validated.
For example, I've
had astral dreams
where I remember going
somewhere I'd never been before.
And even receiving
a name of a place
and then later in
my waking life,
I did physically go there.
And it looked exactly
as it did in the dream.
Another common trait
of astral dreams
is that events feel
more sequential.
Other types of dreams
tend to jump around
and we may not remember how we
got from one point to the next.
Astral dreams, on the other
hand, follow a clear sequence.
Just like in our waking
life, we may remember flashes
of those dreams and wonder, wait
a minute, did I really do that?
Or was it a dream?
What's happening here?
What are we doing in the astral
realms when we're sleeping?
Well, every night
during the deepest part
of our sleep cycle,
we all astral travel
to the Akashic zone
to record everything
that happened that day.
It's our personal book of life.
Also, lightworkers are those
who've said to the universe,
I want to serve in the light.
I want to help.
We're often given assignments
during dream time,
where our higher self
is serving at some level
within the astral realm.
We may be on a
council of some kind.
And we might even receive some
sort of training on the astral
so that we can serve
at a higher level.
For example, I often
have dreams of being
in a classroom or a large
gathering of some kind.
We're being taught
by a master teacher.
Or we'll go out on a
service mission, where
we're helping people or
helping the planet by working
with the grids of the Earth.
When we become lucid during
these kinds of astral dreams,
we can engage with higher
spiritual dimensions
in a conscious way
and learn a lot.
This type of experience makes
us wonder, what is real?
Is reality just what's
happening in the physical?
Or is reality what's
happening in our mind?
Is this physical
experience an illusion?
A projection of a hologram?
If we are infinite
spiritual beings having
a physical experience,
our true self
exists somewhere beyond
this physical dimension.
Then what's real?
And what's a dream?
Science has shown us
that our brain can't
tell the difference
between a real event
and an imagined event or the
events that happen in dreams.
The patterns of neural
firings are the same.
What happens within our
brain while we sleep?
One complete sleep
cycle is typically
90 to 120 minutes long.
Within this time, we transition
through several stages
categorized by the
different brainwave levels.
As we start to fall
asleep, we first
drift into a relaxed state.
Here, the brain
activity is mostly
in what we call the alpha
range of 8 to 13 Hertz.
We're not really asleep, yet.
And we can easily be woken
up in this first stage.
The second stage comes when we
move into the theta brainwave
level of 3 to 8 Hertz.
Here, we're deeply
relaxed and asleep.
At this stage, our memories from
the day become consolidated.
And any unused synapses
of the brain are pruned.
Eventually, we come
into a deep dreamless
sleep within the delta
range of 0.5 to 3 Hertz.
They call this slow wave sleep
and it's highly restorative.
When we astral travel, it's
often during this stage.
There's not much brain
activity happening here.
It takes a lot of purposeful
practice using astral travel
methods and deep
meditation to be
able to maintain consciousness
when the brain slows down
to this delta range.
But even if we're not conscious
during the astral travel
period, the experience may
later translate into our dreams
during the REM stage.
The final phase of our sleep
cycle, called the REM stage,
is characterized by
rapid eye movements.
On average, this stage begins
at about the 90 minute mark
of our sleep cycle.
At this point, our
brainwave activity
is very similar to
when we're awake.
This period is when we
experience dreaming.
And we have the ability to
become aware in our dreams
during this time.
I remember one astral
dream, in particular,
that I'll share with you.
In my waking life, I'd
been to see a healer
and she told me I had wings.
I was like, yeah,
whatever, I'm no angel.
I didn't believe her.
Then later that week,
I had a dream where
I was in this big meeting hall.
And I was walking
down a corridor where
there was a mirror to my left.
I stopped and looked
at myself in the mirror
and I saw my reflection.
As I saw my reflection,
I was surprised to see
these little black
wings on my back.
And I thought, oh,
I do have wings.
Look at that.
They're cute.
But they're so tiny
and why are they black?
Then I moved on with the dream.
And when I woke up, I
remembered this image of myself
in the mirror.
And I thought, huh,
maybe I do have wings.
Whenever we see ourselves
in a mirror while dreaming,
it's very symbolic.
It's a representation
of our energetic form.
So if you ever see
your reflection
in a mirror during a
dream, pay attention.
Now about a month or so later,
I had another astral dream
where I was in some
kind of training
learning how to navigate
and fly using my wings.
In this dream, my wings were
no longer small and black.
They were much bigger.
And I was learning this new
skill of how to fly with them.
It was like learning
how to hang glide.
It felt very visceral and real.
And it was a challenge learning
to balance and to the steer
to get the method down.
Now this was some form
of astral training
that was teaching me how
to work with my wings.
Prior to that point, any
flying dreams I ever remembered
were more like I was trying
to swim through the air using
my arms and legs.
This one was very different.
There's so much for us to
explore within our dream time.
So how do we build a practice
of conscious dreaming?
Let's review some
steps to break it down
into a practical formula.
First, prepare your body.
Try not to eat anything
after 6:00 or 7:00 PM.
And avoid substances
that might interfere
with dreaming including alcohol,
marijuana, or sleep medicine.
We generally experience
two to three sleep cycles
throughout the night, depending
on how long we sleep for.
One technique to help you wake
up between the sleep cycles
is to drink a full glass of
water before going to bed.
Now I know we don't
all want to get up
in the middle of the night to go
to the bathroom, but doing this
will give you the opportunity
to wake up and journal
any dreams from that
first cycle of the night.
Now the second step is
to prepare your mind.
Give yourself 20 minutes before
bed to set your intention
and meditate.
Do some journaling to first
get clear on what questions
you'd like answered or
what guidance you need.
Once you get clear and set
your intention, write it down.
Next to this intention, draw
on the symbol of Neptune.
This symbol is an invocation
of the archetypal energy
of Neptune, which
governs the dream
time and the subconscious.
Drawing the symbol invokes
this archetypal energy
to come in and support
the process of answering
our intention or question
through the dream time.
After setting your intention,
now meditate for 20 minutes.
Relaxing your body and
emptying your mind.
Visualize a river
flowing through your mind
and let it wash away any
thoughts or distractions.
Bring yourself to inner
stillness and peace.
Once your mind is clear,
bring your awareness
and focus back to
your intention.
And now identify a symbol that
represents your intention.
Trust whatever is the first
symbol that comes to mind.
Now we're going to draw
from the exercise I shared
in the episode on astral travel,
but with a slight modification
that is specific to creating
a doorway for astral dreaming.
Within your mind, visualize
a dot on the wall.
Again, it could be a
black dot on a white wall
or a white dot on a black wall.
Once you have that
dot, now overlay
the symbol of your intention
on top of that dot.
Focus your mind, holding your
focus on the dot on the wall
and your intention
for the dream time.
After about five
minutes of focusing
on the dot on the
wall, expand the dot
until it touches the
edges of the wall.
And with the dot
expanded, visualize it now
becoming a tunnel
and walk through.
The journey through
this tunnel this time
isn't to go somewhere, like
we would for astral travel,
but to transition
into the dream time
with more conscious awareness.
Use the tunnel to bridge
your conscious mind
with the subconscious
dream time.
From here, gently lay
down to go to sleep.
You can recreate the
tunnel in your mind,
passing through the tunnel and
focusing on your intention.
And then allow yourself
to drift off to sleep.
When you wake up, without
shifting your body,
first ask yourself, where was I?
What was I dreaming about?
How do I feel?
The key to remembering
is that when we wake up,
we want minimal movement.
Whatever position
your body is in,
stay still to keep
that muscle memory.
Before we start to
journal, without moving,
take a moment to
remember where you were
and what was happening.
Holding still, let it
start coming back to you.
Once it starts
coming back, gently
reach for the journal near
your bed and write it out.
Or you can use a device to
record an audio description
of your dream.
It's best to do all of
this with minimal movement
and disruption.
As soon as we start
to move too much,
we begin losing our
state of muscle memory.
And it becomes more
difficult to remember
until we've anchored the dream.
Even if you don't remember
things at first, ask yourself,
how do I feel?
Am I tired?
Well rested?
Positive?
Confused?
Review the question you
wrote down the night
before going to sleep.
Ask yourself, do I have
a sense of the answer?
Even if all you remember
is a few snippets--
maybe a person, or feeling of
stress, or whatever it may be--
it still counts.
So write it down.
Even a little bit of
remembering is helpful.
And the more we practice
this process of journaling,
the more we are conditioning
ourselves to remember.
We need to make it a
practice, a part of life
if we want to engage
with these higher forms
of lucid or conscious dreaming.
When we make it a practice, we
condition our subconscious mind
pay attention.
It's an active process to
build and open this bridge
to conscious dreaming.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
To fit this in, it's
best to give ourselves
maybe an extra 30 minutes or
so first thing in the morning
to reflect and journal
before we have to get going.
And when we make this
a daily practice,
we can become more and more
conscious of our dreams.
When we're paying
attention to our dreams,
it opens the door for
a form of communication
with our higher self and guides.
But it's up to us
to make the effort
and reflect on what is revealed
through that universal language
of the archetypes in our dreams.
When we get more
conscious of our dreams,
we can use them as a tool
for progression in our life,
towards our full potential.
We can set our intention
for anything we want.
But if it's coming
from the ego, there's
a good chance our dreams
will reflect that and try
to set us straight.
Conscious dreaming is
about higher consciousness.
It's not so concerned
with the ego's wants.
It's coming from a higher
spiritual perspective.
The question is,
how are we going
to use this time
within our dreams?
If we are aware
within the dream,
are we going to
use that awareness
to manipulate our dream for
entertainment or ego purposes?
Or is there a higher
intention to learn and grow?
From what level of
consciousness are we engaging?
Remember, conscious
dreaming is about becoming
aware of the fact
that we're dreaming.
But we're not trying
to manipulate it.
Let go of the fear factor.
Become a witness and observe.
There's nothing to be afraid of.
Ask, what's the lesson here?
What am I supposed to know?
What's my guidance telling me?
How does this answer my
question or help my progression?
Just by asking the question,
it will help bring the dream
to a higher level.
Remember if any knowledge, tool,
or experience isn't leading
toward your progression in life,
then it's not doing any good.
Knowledge for the
sake of knowledge
really doesn't help us.
Knowledge that leads
towards progression
is about giving us a greater
awareness of our divinity.
When we apply this
kind of knowledge,
we can make real change
and transformation
happen in our lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Join me again as we venture
into the world of crystals
and how we can work with
them to enhance our life.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for exploring the
mysteries of the dream time
with me in this episode
of Mystery Teachings.